---
title: Class, power and revolution in Sudan
date: 2021/6/21
description: http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/
tag: Sudan
author: Anne Alexander
---

# Class, power and revolution in Sudan

From Algiers to Beirut and Baghdad to Khartoum, it appears that revolution is once again “the choice of the people”—as a slogan echoed by tens of thousands on protests in Sudan puts it.[1](http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/#footnote-10080-1) Meanwhile, the temperature of social and political struggles has been visibly rising in Iran, Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia and Jordan. The most significant mobilisations from below have triggered major political crises for the ruling class in the past year—claiming the scalps of two presidents and two prime ministers. In the case of Sudan, the mass movement forced a negotiated transfer of power to a transitional government composed of representatives of opposition parties and protest leaders in an uneasy coalition with some of the old regime’s generals and militia bosses. While mainstream commentators and analysts have tended to scoff at claims that this latest round of uprisings will achieve any lasting change at the level of the state or society, there is no doubt that the return of popular revolts to the Middle East is bringing a new sense of purpose and hope to millions across the region, after the bloody drama of counter-revolution and war that seemed to have buried the hopes of 2011.

It is right to celebrate the return of revolutionary possibilities, and to salute the creativity and resilience of the protesters whose courage is driving these mobilisations forward. But there are also crucial questions to debate. How will these revolts avoid the fate of the previous round of uprisings? As Asef Bayat has noted, these uprisings were rich in the experience of “revolution as movement”, but produced a meagre harvest of “revolution as change”, whether measured in terms of reforms to the existing state, or in terms of the creation of alternative institutions of state power.[2](http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/#footnote-10080-2) In comparison with the revolutions of the 1970s, Bayat argues, those in the wave of 2010-12 lacked any serious drive to redistribute wealth and power downwards, gave birth to few experiences of self-management and control of production or land by workers or the poor and did not generate “new state institutions or novel means of government that could embody any vision of deep change”.[3](http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/#footnote-10080-3) Was this because the “revolutionaries” who emerged in the course of these epic struggles were more interested in revolutionary performance in the streets than seizing the state and working out how to change it? If so, was that because their imaginations had been stunted by the various forms of neoliberal sensibility that enveloped them in their everyday lives, meaning that the separation of “the economic” from “the political” was simply taken for granted, along with the existence of the free market?[4](http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/#footnote-10080-4) Will this cycle simply repeat itself in the current and future waves of uprisings, through the endless succession of ecstatic moments of community, solidarity and sacrifice? Or is there another way out?

This article will argue that there is, but that it requires the further development of these kinds of popular revolt into revolutions where collective action by the organised working class is more than an engine of mass mobilisation, but also provides a real and democratically accountable leadership for “the people” in their battle against the state. It is possible to catch glimpses of what that might look like, but this requires a conscious departure from contemporary ways of thinking about revolution, and a rediscovery of the Marxist tradition. Lenin’s famous formula from 1915 outlines “symptoms” of a revolutionary situation including “a crisis in the policy of the ruling class, leading to a fissure through which the discontent and indignation of the oppressed classes burst forth,” an increase in the “suffering and want of the oppressed classes” and “a considerable increase in the activity of the masses”.[5](http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/#footnote-10080-5) As Daniel Bensaïd notes, both Lenin and Trotsky’s definitions of revolutionary crises involve the “interplay of elements which interact in complex and variable ways” and a process of “reciprocal conditioning”.[6](http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/#footnote-10080-6)

Lenin’s sketch of the revolutionary situation contains three ideas which we can try to build up a little further. Firstly, there is the notion that crises are developing at the top and bottom of society simultaneously. Secondly, the polarisation between rulers and ruled—between “them” and “us”—is driven by the agency of the masses. It isn’t enough for people to be angry, frustrated or miserable. They have to start taking action and trying to change things for themselves, not simply wait passively for someone else to do it for them. Finally, there is the question of consummation. Lenin warns:

> Not every revolutionary situation…gives rise to a revolution; revolution arises only out of a situation in which the above-mentioned objective changes are accompanied by a subjective change, namely, the ability of the revolutionary class to take revolutionary mass action strong enough to break (or dislocate) the old government, which never, not even in a period of crisis, “falls”, if it is not toppled over.[7](http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/#footnote-10080-7)

This third point underscores why it is not enough to rely on mapping out the forces on the battlefield according to whether they are part of “them” (the ruling class) or with “us” (the people). We also need to know which classes or fractions of classes are arrayed on either side. This is because the conflict will not be decided by weight of numbers alone (otherwise “our” side would already have won, as how could the 1 percent withstand the 99 percent?). It will be won by those who are able to deploy the “shared capacities and interests” that objectively define social classes because they arise out of the relations of production, as a weapon in battle to break the political resolve of their antagonists and ultimately to overthrow them.[8](http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/#footnote-10080-8)

These twin aspects of class—its objective roots in the relations of production, and its ability to become a weapon—are crucial to revolutionary strategy in the Marxist tradition, but alien to mainstream sociology. They are also alien to much of the thinking about crisis and revolution that has dominated the radical left during the long “retreat from class” over the past 40 years or so (unsurprisingly coinciding with the rise of neoliberalism).[9](http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/#footnote-10080-9) Versions of the idea that the revolutionary subject is a “multitude” of the oppressed and exploited, or even just very large numbers of “ordinary citizens”, permeate both academic left analysis and much of the “common sense” of theorising by social movement activists.[10](http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/#footnote-10080-10)

In contrast, this article argues that the strategic power of class as a weapon in the hands of workers has the ability to transform political revolt and social discontent into social revolution. Despite the changes wrought by decades of neoliberalism and war in the structure of the societies now in revolutionary ferment, the proletariat, the “special class”, as Hal Draper put it, is still the only class that “by the conditions of its existence, embodies a social programme pointing to an alternative to capitalism”.[11](http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/#footnote-10080-11)

It flows from this argument, therefore, that struggles by workers in their workplaces are exceptionally important to the development of the mass movements of our age. Strikes are not just another kind of protest, but can transform the whole trajectory of the mobilisation from below. When workers begin to test their power as workers, and not just as angry citizens, this has two effects. Firstly, it reveals workers’ own power to themselves:

> Class organisation brings class characteristics to the fore, and as a function of organisation, class characteristics increasingly take precedence over merely individual reactions, the greater the scale of class involvement. There is a feedback effect, in which class reactions can also reshape and re-educate individual reactions. Thus class consciousness develops.[12](http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/#footnote-10080-12)

However, it also “reveals the emerging class forces”.[13](http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/#footnote-10080-13) In other words, it brings the ruling class into sharp focus and tears the veil of neutrality off the state and its bureaucratic and military institutions.

This process of revelation, of re-making ideas in the course of practical action to change the world is the only thing that can cut through the fug of “neoliberal sensibility” enveloping us. Bayat’s tentative answer to his questions, which seems to focus on trying to sort out the problem in the realm of ideas alone through the development of intellectual radicalism disconnected organically from working class struggle, misses the point. He also therefore misses the signs that workers as workers are playing a central role in shaping these mass revolts, even if they have not yet developed forms of independent organisation that turn what is latent into reality. In order to both understand and act on this potential we need two things. Firstly, a thoroughgoing investigation into the “internal mechanism” of the developing revolution, as Trotsky started to undertake in the wake of the 1905 Revolution in Russia.[14](http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/#footnote-10080-14) Secondly, to nurture and encourage those elements which point the way we want to go, recognising that, as Magdi El Gizouli perceptively notes, although “the compass indicates the direction of what seems today impossible objectively, the revolution brought with it the coordinates of its possibility”.[15](http://isj.org.uk/class-power-and-revolution-in-sudan/#footnote-10080-15)

In the current wave of revolts in the Middle East, the revolution in Sudan provides some of the most important insights into both of these things. This article attempts a sketch of the Sudanese ruling class and its relations with the state and explores the development of class organisation and ­consciousness among the people on the other side of the barricades. Not all of them are ­workers, of course, but I will argue that an orientation on developing working class organisation and political confidence will be crucial for Sudanese ­revolutionaries who want to go beyond the acute limitations imposed by the politics of the “transitional period” and defend themselves and their revolution from a brutal reassertion of the old order’s power.